.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1995 by Yury Shevchuk.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" This file may be copied under the terms of GNU General Public License.
.\"
.Id $Id: ttools.1,v 1.1.1.1 1995/12/22 12:24:39 sizif Exp $
.TH ttools 1 "$Date: 1995/12/22 12:24:39 $" "botik" "TTOOLS"
.\"-------------------------------
.SH NAME
TTOOLS \- low-level tools for transputer programming
.SH DESCRIPTION
TTOOLS is a collection of cross-tools for trasnputer software
development.  TTOOLS comprise assembler
.RB ( ast (1)),
link editor
.RB ( lit (1)),
object file exploration utility
.RB ( litdump (1)),
and binary image disassembler
.RB ( dast (1)).

TTOOLS uses an original object and loadable file format
.RB ( lit (5)).
The LIT format is capable of representing commands and data with
arbitrary argument expressions, which makes it possible to perform
additional command size minimization in link time, resulting in more
compact and faster programs.

Another consequence of this capability is that assembly language
programmer is allowed to perform arbitrary arithmetics on external
symbols, while traditional systems can only handle certain addition
and substraction type expressions.

Finally, LIT format allows for omission of unnecessary
.I fragments
of object files in link time, whereas traditional systems treat
object file as an indivisible whole.  See
.BR ast (1)
for more details.

TTOOLS distribution includes a generic routine for loading of LIT
format loadable files
.RI ( startups/shared/litload.c ),
and two reference loaders that use it.  The first one, found in
.IR startups/absolute ,
is a cross-loader, producing a ROM-able binary image.  The second one,
in
.IR startups/linkboot ,
is a link-in loader for programs that boot via a transputer link.
Using it, one can make
.BR lit (1)
produce link-bootable programs.
.\"-------------------------------
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 1995 Yury Shevchuk

TTOOLS is free software; you are welcome to use and modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2, as published
by the Free Software Foundation.

TTOOLS is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY, without even an implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
for more details.
.\"-------------------------------
.SH AVAILABILITY
The home site for TTOOLS is ftp.botik.ru (193.232.174.1), directory
.IR pub/local/ttools .
.\"-------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ast (1),
.BR dast (1),
.BR lit (1),
.BR lit (5),
.BR litdump (1)
.\"-------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
Yury Shevchuk (sizif@botik.ru)
.\"-------------------------------
